In this video we'll learn how to access the data that a pointer is pointing to in order to access the
data that a pointer is pointing to.
We need to follow the pointer to where it's pointing.
This is called dereferencing the pointer.
Let's say that score pointer is a pointer to an integer and it has a valid address.
Then in order to access the integer that's where pointer is pointing to.
We use that dereferencing or indirection operator which is the asterisk.
I know what you're thinking.
The asterisk Didn't we just use the asterisk to declare the pointer.
Yes and lots of people over the years have been critical of C plus plus his choice to use the asterisk
to both declare and dereference a pointer.
But it is what it is.
And once we understand how all this works it isn't confusing at all.
Let's take a look at the example.
First we declare score to be an integer and initialize it to 100.
Then we declare score pointer to be a pointer to an integer and initialize it to the address of score.
Now score pointer points to score.
If we want to get to score via the pointer then we must dereference the pointer.
Notice that in the first output statement we're using the dereference operator on score pointer.
This follows the pointer and gives us what it points to.
In this case we display 100 since Gore pointer points to score when we dereference a pointer on the
left hand side of an assignment statement.
This results in an l value or the address of what score pointer is pointing to which in this case is
score.
So we store 200 in that address which is the address of score.
So now we just change the value of score indirectly via a pointer.
Notice the syntax makes sense.
We use the asterisk to declare the pointer and then once the pointer is declared the asterisk is used
to dereference it.
Let's see another example.
In this example we declared two doubles high temp and low temp and we initialized them to 100 points
seven and thirty seven point four.
We also declared temp pointer as a pointer to a double and initialize it to point to high temp.
So if we have a pointer and we want what it points to we dereference the pointer.
That's exactly what we're doing.
The first output statement we're following or dereferencing temp pointer which gives us what it points
to and in this case we display a hundred point seven.
Now in the assignment statement we're storing the address of low temp to 10 pointer.
So now 10 pointers pointing to low temp.
And again if we want the low temp with dereference temp pointer and that gets us to where it's pointing.
So far I've used instant doubles but the data had can be anything.
In this case name is a C++ string object with the value Frank and string pointer is a pointer to a string
and we initialize it to point to name if we dereference string pointer as in the first output statement
we display Frank if name then changes to James and we execute the same output statement then we display
James.
Let's head over to the ID and we'll see some more examples of dereferencing pointers in live code.
Ok so I'm in the ID and I'm in the section 12 workspace in the dereference project.
I'd like to go over some examples of dereferencing pointers so that you really clear as to what's going
on here.
Let's start with a very simple example here.
And again we'll draw it out we'll work through it before we run it.
In this case I've got an integer called score and I'm initializing it to 1000.
So let's say that score is over here it has storage.
Obviously we have 100 in and let's say that it's that location a thousand.
Again so that's my score variable.
Now I've got another variable right here score pointer is a pointer to an integer.
So here score pointer
and it's a pointer to a nature that means it can hold addresses of integers and I'm initializing it
to the address of score the address of scores a thousand.
So we're putting a thousand in this variable which means that that's my pointer.
So if you want to follow the pointer get to what it's pointing to you need to dereference the pointer.
That's exactly what I'm doing right here I'm dereferencing score pointer.
So it's got to follow the pointer to where it's pointing.
And in this case it's pointing to that memory address right here which has 100.
That's what the splice in this case I'm dereferencing the pointer again.
But it's on the left hand side of an assignment statement.
Remember the left hand side of an assignment statement is an address or a location.
That's where we want to store things right.
After all when we are assigning something we're storing that value somewhere.
In this case I'm dereferencing score pointer.
So if I dereference score pointer I follow the pointer to this address right here.
Right so I'm putting 200 in here now.
So now when I come back and display the dereference score points are going to go back over here.
But this time it's going to see a 200.
And if I just display score all on its own since score is that variable right.
It's going to print 200 as well.
OK.
So again play with these and you can follow these pointers around and see what's happening.
So let's run this and we're expecting 100 200 and 200.
So let's give this a run.
And there you go 100 200 and 200 exactly what we expected.
All right let's do a few more of these.
I'm going to come at this code and then we'll walk through it together and I'll do some diagrams as
well.
OK so in this case what do we have.
We have two doubles.
We have a double called high temp and I'll drive over here.
So this double is called high temp and it's value is one hundred point seven.
And let's again say that this is at location a thousand in memory.
Then I've got another double right here called low temp and let's say that its location is 2000 and
memory and its value right now is initialized to thirty seven point four OK.
Pretty's.
Now here we've got a pointer called temperature pointer.
So there's my temperature pointer.
It's got storage associated with it and we're initializing it to the address of high temperature with
the address of high temperature is a thousand.
And there's my pointer.
And when we're doing this we always have to be sure that we got it we have our types correct temp pointer
can point to a double high temp is a double.
So all looks good here.
Now if we dereference the pointer right here we're going to follow that temperature pointer to where
it's pointing.
It happened C-p pointing here to high temp and we display a 100 point so now what we're doing here is
we're changing where the pointer is pointing to.
So we're saying 10 pointer now holds the address of low temp.
So what we're doing is we're changing that value right here.
We're breaking this link right here and we're now putting a 2000 here which is the value of low temp.
So this now points to low temp.
And when we dereference the pointer now we follow the pointer to where it's pointing.
It's not pointing here.
So in this case it will produce thirty seven point four.
OK so let's give that a run.
And we've got the 100 point seven in the thirty seven point four.
Just like we expected.
All right.
Now let's do a couple of more complicated examples.
This example isn't more complicated but it's a little bit different.
In this case we've got a string object right here.
Called name and a string object is an object so I've got my object here and it's got a frank string
in it.
So that's kind of what name looks like.
Let's again say that it's a digest of thousands that way it's easy to follow.
Here I've got a string pointer.
So here's my string pointer again.
It's a variable that points to a string object.
So in this case my string pointer holds the address of name which is a thousand.
And there's my pointer all set up.
Now if I want to follow the string pointer to where it's pointing to ID reference it right there.
So in this case I'm following the pointer towards pointing to and I'm printing out what's there.
In this case Frank right here.
But what if we changed name not through the pointer but just name itself.
We can certainly do that right.
In this case we're changing name to James.
So we're changing this right here.
To James
and now we're coming back here and dereferencing the pointer again we never change the pointer.
The pointer still pointing to the same name right.
The same memory address at 0 0 0 0.
But this time we're going to see James there so it's going to print James instead of Frank.
And this really shows you the difference between the pointer and what it's pointing to.
In this case we never modify that pointer but the area we were pointing to was modified.
So let's give this a run and we expect Frank and James to display and there they are frank and James.
OK.
So let's do one last example and this one will really show you the difference between a pointer and
what it's pointing to.
And let's work through this one.
What we've got here is we've got and this is where it starts right here a line 41.
We've got a vector of string objects called Stooges and it's initialized to Larry Moe and Curly.
All right so what does that look like.
Well let's put it over here let's say it's called Stooges.
It's at a location 0 0 0 0 again and Stooges is a vector.
So it's a vector of three items in this case and each one of those items is a string.
So here's Larry here's Moe and here's curly
and these are strings I won't put the quotes around them just to save a little writing time here.
So that's my Stooges vector.
Now I've got a vector pointer.
All right so it's right here it's called vector pointer.
It's a variable and I'm initializing that to no pointer right now it's pointing nowhere.
And that's perfectly fine because pointers are variables.
Here is where I'm initializing my vector pointer to point somewhere.
So at this point I'm saying vector pointer is the address of stooges.
Well the address of stooges is a thousands.
I'm putting a thousand in here now so it's no longer a null pointer and I'm pointing there.
So now how do I work with that vector through the vector pointer.
It's really straightforward as long as you get your syntax correct.
And the way it works is is very very logical.
So suppose I want to print out Larry just Larry and I want to go through this point.
I don't just want to say Stooges.
Obviously I could say something like Stooges dot at zero right.
That'll definitely protect Larry and set it up put statement.
That's basically what I want to do but I want to do it through the vector pointer.
So what do I do.
Here's the syntax right here and I go really carefully here.
So I take my vector pointer and I dereference it.
That gives me the vector that I'm pointing to.
I put some parens around it because that's I want the priority to be high here.
That gives me the vector so on how to do now is say dot at zero.
Remember if I follow my vector pointer What do I get.
I get stooges.
So that's effectively the same as doing that.
So when I execute that code right there it will print out Larry and hopefully that makes sense it may
take a little bit to understand that these parents are critical right here because we want to dereference
that pointer before we use a dot because the DOT has higher precedence than the dereference operator.
So it's important that you put those parens around there.
So I want to print out all of the Stooges through the vector pointer same idea.
What we can do is we can use a arr. base for loop and what's the collection where the collection is
not vector pointer it's what vector pointer is pointing to.
So if I dereference vector pointer then really what I'm getting in here Stooges right.
That's what I'm pointing to.
And now you can see the syntax is really straightforward.
For every stooge in stooges print it out.
So it's going to print out.
Larry Moe and Curly.
Again we're following that vector pointer.
We're get the vector and then once we're at the vector we can do whatever we want.
So here's an example again of really really distinguishing between the pointer and what it points to
remember pointers are simple.
It's just a simple variable that holds addresses what it points to can be super complicated.
Maybe we can have vectors of vectors of vectors and we could certainly get to them through the pointer
by dereferencing the pointer.
Once we have them we can do whatever we want with them.
OK so that finishes up this video.